welcome to topcast and my latest
question for david this is question
number six in the series of questions
that i asked david deutsch during our
conversation
this one is about inherently interesting
versus uninteresting questions
and the question of whether or not if
certain things are undecidable
specifically in mathematics that that
makes them
inherently uninteresting i'd kind of
thought this was the case
to some extent i mean of course
mathematics in and of itself is
intrinsically interesting
however because of girdle's results we
know
that certain things cannot be proven to
be true or proven to be false
in given mathematical systems now this
idea of
decidability or completeness and so
forth
this is a part of mathematical logic
if you talk about baby logic it's
something called sentential logic or
propositional logic you can demonstrate
you can do a proof
in fact this this proof is one of the
exercises that make you go through if
you do
something like logic mathematical logic
philosophical logic at university
that make you go through the process of
demonstrating that
propositional logic for example is both
sound and complete sound means that
everything that can be proved within the
system is
true complete means everything that is
true within the system
has a proof this works for
a bunch of different logics but in
particular the simplest of all logics
as i said propositional logic or
sentential logic
and girdle himself i think showed the
completeness of the next most
complicated logic which is called
predicate logic
which also is both sound and complete
now if you get to something slightly
more complicated than that
which is a logic which includes
something like simple arithmetic and you
can use
pinos axioms of arithmetic then you can
show that
although their sound anything that you
prove within the system
is true within the system the opposite
doesn't hold true
you can actually write down statements
in the system
for which you have no proof in other
words you cannot decide you cannot prove
that the statement that you've
you've written down is either true or
false it's
a statement with that is undecidable
that remains undecidable this was
girdle's great insight and of course had
significant consequences for the
foundations of mathematics
and so part of my question to david
today wasn't me
acting like an interviewer it was me
genuinely asking a question
about the interestingness if that's a
word
of these undecidable things it's like
what's the point of these undecidable
things anyway
who really cares yes it exists it's
interesting insofar as now we know
that there can't be a single set of
axioms from which you can
prove all of mathematics for all time
and that means that mathematics is a
creative exercise yes that's great
that's interesting
but if you went and found any particular
one
of these undecidable propositions it
doesn't have any effect in the physical
world
does it and i was laboring under a
misconception there because
david brings up penrose
using undecidable concepts within
physics within a certain kind of
cosmology and so that's really
interesting
that's something i learned now i didn't
go and investigate it any further i
think it would be over my head but it is
interesting to think about the fact that
there
could be physics which has undecidable
terms within it that relate directly to
the physical world in which case that
would be very interesting because that
could have consequences for technology
and our understanding of physical
reality anyway without any further ado
let's get into the next question for
david
and you have the great dichotomy of
saying problems are inevitable
but problems are soluble and here
i have heard over the years people push
back against this especially the second
part that
problems are soluble for example they
argue
we can't know everything and
they will invoke that it's provably the
case that given girdle's result
there are true statements we cannot
prove are true so there is some
and there are some mathematics it's not
decidable so some problems are not
soluble isn't isn't that correct what's
the
what's the argument against that line of
reasoning
i i think that the this line of
is reaching for a standard of
knowing that is impossible for anything
it's it's not possible to know even
provable things
by the standard that they're asking to
know unprovable things
when we say that something is provable
we mean that it's provable
from certain axioms
and godel's theorem is about provability
which means provability from axioms
now if you if you have an undecidable
statement in some formal system
and if it was true you could always add
that
as another axiom and then it would be
provable
so you might ask yeah but but how do we
know that that
statement you're adding is true if we
can't prove it
well unfortunately that objection
applies to any set of axioms and
it applies to the original set of axioms
as well
and uh this is this is uh
a mistake that has been made by many
mathematicians
even after godel i think it was made by
virtually all mathematicians before
godel
but even after uh mathematicians tend to
think that there is
a class of axioms
that that don't need proof or something
that that
they are self-proving or self
self-evident
or they come from mathematical intuition
which is infallible
or something like that but in fact the
the
axioms the rules of inference in logic
that for example
if the proposition a and b is true
then it is necessarily the case that b
is also true now
it seems self-evident but uh it is not
provable so uh
what are you going to do are you going
to
say that this is a problem that is
insoluble and therefore it's not true
that problems are soluble
no people don't don't bother saying it
with
with axioms because they have this
misconception that axioms are somehow
enshrined by god or something and we can
know
for sure that they are true yes
but that's not what knowledge is about
we are trying to solve problems we're
not trying to establish
truths and uh
girdles theorem is not about
establishing truth either it's about
deriving things from other things
yes yes and these some one
uh line of discussion i often pursue
here and correct me if i'm wrong but
this
vast class of undecidable or
unprovable statements which must
vastly outnumber the number that are
provable statements
they're in a sense uninteresting because
that's not what the claims of
science physics for example consist of
and so they don't have and again i would
appeal to your
better knowledge on this they don't have
any they can't possibly have any
effects on our world they're not going
to help us to
solve problems as you would say we know
they exist but beyond that
what what are they interesting in any
way um
well they're certainly interesting
because mathematics is interesting and
yeah and we're interested in
abstractions as well as
in physical problems um
and the the reason that that uh it seems
implausible at the moment that
that um undecidable
propositions might be relevant to some
practical problem
like how to how to feed the world or how
to
uh eliminate viruses and and so on
is that uh the undecidable propositions
are all about infinite sets
um infinite sets of things like the the
set of all numbers and
uh that kind of thing and
uh physics as we currently
conceive of it the the infinite sets
that appear in physics
are very tame and don't have these
problems
in them but that's that's like you know
i can conceive that
that maybe one day somebody invents a
different physical theory
where the the undecidability of
certain propositions about the real
numbers would
tell you something about whether well
about
how to do and how not to do certain
things that you want
there i think roger penrose once pointed
out that certain theories of quantum
gravity
do depend on touring undecidable
propositions
basically it's it's like um you have if
you're
working out a finement diagram to work
out
how what the probability is that a
certain gravitational wave will interact
with another gravitational wave you know
this is
very far from ordinary experience then
if you want to work that out accurately
you have to do a sum you have to sum the
amplitudes for
for all possible processes over all
geometries and for all possible
topologies
and to enumerate all possible topologies
in the relevant sense i mean i'm not a
mathematician i don't know about this
stuff but but
uh apparently that's that's an
undecidable task
and therefore you couldn't work out uh
this
probability amplitude for the
gravitational wave doing something or
other
because you would have to have a
mathematical expression for
all topologies in a in a given sense so
that's an example of how in principle
laws of physics might have
undecidable consequences
uh yes and therefore that the
undecidable
consequences are actually interesting
well it would be
physically interesting yes it you know
in principle
something that you wanted to do might
depend on
working out this thing um but
uh i i i don't see any particular reason
for
making a uh uh just
as long as we have the necessities of
life and comfort
i don't see any reason for making a
distinction between
uh problems in engineering
and in physics and in pure mathematics i
mean
they're they're all problems they're all
conflicts between theories that
that interest people people want to know
what the resolution is
um and um
one thing i say in in the book about
pure mathematical problems
is that sometimes discovering
that something is undecidable is the
solution to the problem
in in the sense that it's the pro it's
what you wanted to know
because you you have in mind some
some primer facial argument that it that
a certain proposition is true and
another prima facie argument that it
that it's um false and
then you discover that it's actually
undecidable
and that explains why you could have
these two
conflicting intuitions about it and then
you can go and criticize your intuitions
in other ways because you know
that you're not going to be able to
resolve it by proving one of them true
or false